EXPERT: aleyda-solis
VIDEO TITLE: Googles Helpful Content Update Aleyda Solis
VIDEO URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fbv2-JtC5PM
------------------------------------------------------------

Bernard:
Hello. Oh, welcome everybody.  
People are just trickling in. I guess I'll 
start with a brief little cookie cutter thing.  
What's everybody's favorite book that they've read 
so far? Keep it to one to two sentences real quick  
as we have people trickle in. I'll start to say 
that I've been reading this fantasy novel series  
called Clearscope Archives. Really nice to finally 
take a break from reading so much productivity and  
business stuff. Kevin? Oh, Aleyda. Go ahead.
Aleyda: 
I started actually reading House of Dragon 
the book, after I watched episode one  
because I realized that it was good and it was 
a proper book behind the story. But oh my God,  
700 pages. I'm like, "It will take a while. 
Let's see if I finish the book before the series  
actually ends in a few years."
Cindy: 
I'll say all my reading is business oriented or 
very serious. I was trying to think of something  
that was lighthearted and I can't come up with 
anything. But the Hostage at the Table is a  
business negotiation book that's very good.
Bernard: 
Oh, interesting. Kevin, Ethan, any books?
Ethan: 
My most recent favorite book is of 
course Product-Led SEO by Eli Schwartz. 
Bernard:
Of course. 
Ethan:
But my other favorite  
book is 15 Commitments of Conscious Leadership, 
which is this book that's actually very good about  
different patterns in the workplace, like don't 
gossip and how to give difficult feedback and  
things like that. It's super useful. That's my 
favorite recent book. And then Product-Led SEO. 
Kevin:
Yeah. Ethan, Double on 15 Commitments of Conscious  
Leadership, probably one of the books that changed 
my life the most. And the second one that also a  
profound impact on me is Principles by Ray Dalio. 
Classic. If you haven't read it, then you should. 
Bernard:
Awesome. Cool. We have over 125 people  
here now joining us for the round table. Want to 
just give a great thanks to Aleyda, Cindy, Ethan,  
Kevin for joining us. We want to discuss 
everything that's been going on with Google's most  
recent... Oh, I'll go update. Definitely a lot 
of chatter that people have been speculating on,  
and we figured why not get some of the best 
and brightest minds in SEO together to think  
about and discuss what's been going on with the 
helpful content update and also forecasting what  
this implies for SEO and content moving forward.
A brief bit of introductions, we have Aleyda.  
Aleyda is an international SEO consultant and 
founder of Orainti, a highly specialized boutique  
SEO consultancy. She's a popular blogger, 
speaker, author of SEO Las Claves Esenciales.  
Her writings have been published in Search 
Engine Land, Search Engine Journal, and Moz. 
We next have Cindy. Cindy is the CEO of Mobile 
Moxi and also an author of Mobile Marketing,  
Finding Your Customers No matter Where They 
Are. She speaks and trains people around  
the world in mobile marketing and mobile SEO.
Next we have Ethan. Ethan's, the CEO of Graphite,  
a premium growth agency. Graphite 
focuses on SEO content strategy that  
builds scalable growth engines for companies 
like Masterclass, Robin Hood and Netflix. 
Lastly, we have Kevin. Kevin is a strategic growth 
advisor and creator of the Growth Memo Newsletter  
and host of the Tech Bound podcast. He's run SEO 
at organizations like Shopify, G2, Atlassian,  
and consulted for brands like Ramp, Eventbrite, 
or Finder. He's also an active angel investor. 
Brief bit about myself, I'm 
the co-founder of Clearscope,  
the leading SEO content optimization software 
for quality content teams. Before Clearscope,  
I was doing SEO Consulting where I 
did companies like DoorDash, Strava,  
Compass. And I did a lot of growth advising at 500 
startups. Round of applause for everybody here. 
To kick us off, I wanted to ask Kevin and Aleyda 
to get their initial thoughts on what the Google  
helpful content is, and when it initially 
rolled out, what were your first impressions?  
You had a lot of things that y'all put together 
in terms of the resources and your opinions that  
got shared pretty widely in the community. Just to 
start us off, what your initial impressions were? 
Aleyda:
My initial impression is that this  
update could have been call 
the authenticity or originality  
update, rather than helpful update. And I have to 
say, I actually launched this poll over Twitter  
to see if people were seeing any impact. And most 
of the answers, and I got 629 votes, most of the  
answers, 58% of people didn't see any impact. Then 
16% saw positive impact. 9% only, mostly negative. 
And it makes sense because when you go and 
take a look and see which are the websites that  
tend to have seen an important meaningful 
impact, these are all scrape aggregated, non  
original content type of websites. For example, 
manual, dictionary, lyrics type of websites,  
there are tons. If you go to C street movers and 
shakers and go to those websites that have drop  
the most in this time interval. These are very 
spammy type of websites or not necessarily  
real valuable businesses or businesses that have 
a real business model or real product or service  
beyond ads. It makes sense that all of us who 
are SEOs haven't seen an impact on our clients,  
that tend to have an actual product 
or surveys or value behind in it. 
Kevin:
Yeah, I want to double that.  
And to just take a step back, I think one context 
of this update fits into is that there's more and  
more content on the web. It's super easy to create 
content. We haven't even spoken about AI content.  
I'm going to not dive into that for now. Maybe we 
can later. But in general, it's just super easy to  
publish. And the challenge that Google is in front 
of is that it's getting harder to crawl the web. 
One thing that wasn't mentioned in the context 
of this update is that every August for the  
last couple of years we see indexing issues 
on Google side and infrastructure problems.  
There's a challenge of just reigning in all 
this content. And then of course ranking it  
is also more and more challenging. For example, 
one of the types of sites that seem to have been  
impacted the hardest are lyric sites.
And a lot of these sites are just copy  
pasting lyrics. There's no additional value to 
the user. Is pretty much duplicated content.  
And the sites that actually one, like genius.com 
and azlyrics.com, they all provide an additional  
value. Like in genius.com, you can comment and 
annotate lyrics, which is an additional value. 
Google just sets the bar higher and higher 
of what acceptable content looks like.  
And this is another example of an update that 
does that, that facilitates that at scale.  
Now one thing before I pass it on that 
I want to highlight real quick is that  
I think we all, and I certainly contributed to 
that, I think we all expected more regular content  
to be affected by this update and what the very 
early data shows, it's that it's really the bottom  
of the barrel type of contents. Almost spammy, 
no value, goes after some high search volume,  
get a quick answer. I saw a website for example, 
that teaches math and they go after queries like  
"What's 10% of 73?" There's super basic type of 
stuff. And that's I think what Google means with  
content that's credits for search engines 
rather than users. I'm going to stop there. 
Bernard:
Ethan Cindy,
anything to add?
Cindy: 
Total agreement. I think that may be that we'll 
really get a stronger sense in the next couple  
of weeks. It does seem like this was a plan, that 
they launched the helpful content update and then  
the September update. It may be that helpful 
content added some kind of new evaluation or  
some kind of new waiting and then the core update 
expanded that out or applied that in a wider way.  
Yeah, I think it's TBD, but definitely uniqueness. 
Does uniqueness and value add are being given more  
weight, however that plays out?
Ethan: 
Yeah, the way that I think about it is, social 
media is filled with fake information and Google  
is filled with useless information. They're 
generally trying to solve this problem of useless  
information. And I think I inferred five themes 
from the update. The first two already existed.  
Theme one is "Did you find your answer? Did 
you go back and get it somewhere else?" That's  
the back to Google update is a 
very bad signal and finishing  
on your particular URL is a very good signal. 
That's been around and they're reiterating that. 
The second one is "Are you making content for 
Google? Are you making it for users?" Which is  
also been around for a while. They're reiterating 
that. There's three new themes that I see.  
The first theme that I think is very interesting 
is topical authority, which is something that  
we've been thinking a lot about at our company.
And that means that rather than domain authority,  
which is what's your authority overall, 
rather what is your authority for a particular  
topical area? For MasterClass early on, 
MasterClass had authority for the names  
of the celebrities like Gordon Ramsey, 
but not for the food category overall.  
We would focus on things like Beef Wellington. 
Topical authority is a great way for sites that  
are smaller or newer to rank for things.
Google repeated in several of their points,  
"Are you known for a particular thing?" And the 
inputs for that are things like branded search,  
a masterclass and Gordon Ramsey, or when 
somebody types in Beef Wellington and they  
landed on your site, do they have good engagement? 
And then you'll basically build topical authority  
that way. That's about one new theme.
The second new theme is rewritten content,  
which I think is probably the biggest problem 
around useless content, which is everyone's  
rewriting each other's articles. And they do that 
because it's cheaper, it costs more money to write  
a brand new article and to have somebody with 
expertise. You just say, "Hey, go rewrite the  
first result," and then somebody else rewrites 
that result and everyone's rewriting each other's  
content. And then you have basically thousands 
of the variations of the same thing. In the last- 
Cindy:
Oh, sorry. It's not just cheaper.  
It takes original thought and that's hard. And 
I think Google wants make things a little bit  
more fair where if you have original thought 
that's valuable, that you get rewarded with  
traffic even if you're not a great SEO or even 
if you're not paying a content farm or whatever.
Aleyda:
I think that actually Google  
did a good work commenting the type of criteria 
they will take into consideration, because in the  
original dot that they publish, they actually 
mention they will be able to identify if the  
content seems to have little value, low added 
value or is otherwise no particularly helpful to  
those queries, for the searches. They actually 
have a very straightforward system, let's say. 
And the low added value or little value, 
especially for queries, as Kevin mentioned before,  
we can see broader queries, ambiguous queries that 
can have a diverse type of intent. For example,  
I see queries, for example, white cutters or 
toy guns, for which aggregators of reviews,  
were ranking before in the top 10, not anymore. 
I see more whether actual best type of list  
well written and research and backed, and then 
commercially driven, category, pages that are  
rich in their content, ranking now instead.
I do believe that Google has  
done a really good job in this case, specifying 
that this automatically generated content or  
that you pretty much use whatever tool out there, 
or very cheap writer without not knowledge at all  
in order to be able to rank for this broad term or 
query like, yeah, you're not going to be able to  
do that anymore that easily.
Bernard: 
That's here in agreement that... And 
this is one of the questions that have  
already popped up. Is that the helpful 
content update is like panda version one,  
where it's very clear that certain sites, lyric 
ones being the example that we're all familiar  
with, which are all more or less copy and paste 
examples from one another, are taking great hits. 
And I think we're all trying to talk right 
now about this idea of original, relevant,  
high quality content, where the content itself 
has information gain or some people call it  
originality, uniqueness, a special point of view. 
I want to ask them, to make this kind of a more  
actionable point, what does that information 
gain or unique and relevant content mean to  
each of you? And how would you really start to 
think, okay, if helpful content, at least in its  
current form, and it's very likely Google continue 
to build on top of that, how are you thinking  
about adding information gain where you're not 
just simply just rewriting what is being written? 
And also similarly, you can imagine information 
gain is a potential way that Google might think  
about combating AI content, where AI content, 
at least with the current models, is simply  
regurgitating a lot of what was already written as 
well. How are you thinking about information gain  
and how are you thinking about creating 
unique relevant content moving forward?  
What are your thoughts there?
Kevin: 
Can we pass it to Ethan? I want to 
hear what the rest of his thoughts  
were about the previous question and then 
maybe you can answer the next one too. 
Ethan:
Yeah, well the last thought is just around,  
I would say a misapplication of SEO tools, like 
SEO tools will say "In general, the word count  
is this." Or "In general people are talking about 
these things," which is useful. And then you would  
say, "Okay, well so in general, maybe people want 
this particular length or these are themes that  
people are interested in." And a misapplication 
is, "Okay, well I have to have 1,057 words and I  
have to include the word lemon six times."
I think that's a misapplication of tools.  
I think that that was my last theme. And then, 
Bernard, your question of how we're thinking  
about... I think the main thing is that the 
reason why there's rewritten content and  
regurgitated content, number one is because 
it words. Number two is because it's expensive  
to have premium unique content. I think 
you need to change the business model. 
And the reason why you do that is because if 
you write a hundred articles, five of them are  
going to work. And you don't know which five, 
so you have to spend a small amount of money  
on the 100. If you can be more thoughtful about 
selecting those five that are going to work and  
spending more money on those, and then Google 
changes their system to incentivize uniqueness,  
then you can justify spending that money.
We spend a lot of time just being really  
thoughtful about picking those five so that we 
can spend that money. And then, on our end, we  
basically hire domain experts who are journalists. 
If we're working in finance, we would hire a  
journalist who's written in finance, who has some 
domain expertise. Now we have a business model to  
write really great content for these five 
niche topics. That's how I think about it. 
Cindy:
I'll add in a unique thought,  
at least I think. Is that it does seem very much 
like in this update and a couple of the previous  
ones, Google is directly going after affiliates 
and aggregator sites. And that is something  
that they've done for a long time, but there's a 
unique reason why they would be doing that now.  
Because you see they're going after the affiliate 
sites on this side of the page, and then on this  
side of the page, they are becoming more 
and more of an affiliate site themselves. 
Google pushing everyone 
hard towards merchant center  
and of course flights and hotels and 
rumors of car stuff and insurance stuff,  
and all the other things where Google wants to be 
an aggregator, it doesn't want competition either.  
There's possibly some double dealing.
Kevin: 
Yeah, I do agree with that very much. 
Because one type of sites... We spoke about  
content that doesn't add a lot of value, but 
there's also of content that just answers very  
shallow questions. And that's something Google 
does already themselves. They do it pretty well  
and they don't need sites to do that necessarily. 
I do agree that there's an angle of... Maybe the  
primary intention is to just say, "What else can 
we answer ourselves?" But of course that has an  
impact on stuff like affiliate revenues, data that 
companies can gather, even from shallow questions  
and users that they can track.
Cindy: 
Well. And the other thing, Kevin, and this is 
something that I've been talking about a lot,  
and I say double dealing like it's bad 
and maybe it's bad, but maybe Google does,  
I think, have the best interest of the user in 
mind. But when they can pull in a feed or host  
something in their cloud, they can know that 
it's live and good and up and they can serve  
it more quickly and they can transcribe it, 
transcode it into audio or whatever. And I  
think that that's where they want to go with the 
future of connected devices, internet of things,  
multimodal search. When they host the info, they 
can understand it faster, better and serve it  
faster better.
Aleyda:
Yeah. I agree the two things. On one hand, raising 
the bar for the position zero type of queries that  
they were looking to answer anyway and keep the 
traffic to them. And then on the other hand, the  
money making ones. At the end of the day, they're 
also shifting to become an eCommerce type of  
portal too, competing with Amazon. And we just 
saw earlier today, like an hour ago, yet another  
new release from them facilitating for anybody 
pretty much just using structured data,  
to be able to make the most out of the product 
carousels. And a lot of the updates that they have  
been doing also in the affiliate reviews since 
last year or so, have been very focused on that,  
that those actually focus on those queries, have 
original content, originally review this product. 
Originality and authenticity here, and getting 
the bar higher in order to grab this traffic,  
there's certainly pointing to that. Then on the 
other hand, definitely the way to go will be  
to hire experts to write the content, but if we 
think about it's not that easy. The real expert  
will be actually doing that on a day to day, 
rather than necessarily only writing about it. 
For example, I get emails from time to 
time asking me to write something and  
they would pay to me. No, thank you. 
I'd rather focus on doing actual SEO  
with my high paying clients and brands, 
and then whenever I want, I will share  
my insights about that experience 
rather than being hired as a writer. 
However, I think that a good approach that 
we can see in our own sector is the one that,  
for example, Content King has with their research, 
they have a very well developed content hub.  
They call it SEO Academy. And what they have done 
is to cover every area or topic, the major ones in  
SEO nowadays, and they have their own SEO writing 
the content. And then this SEO will ask for input  
of people specialized in that area so they can 
actually have this added value of real experts. 
And the effort for the expert is actually minimal, 
because it's just a little quote, or an idea,  
or an experience in that particular area. And then 
of course you incentivize the person with a link  
back. The person will also share with their 
own audience and the community. And usually  
these are influencers too. There's a win-win 
type of approach. Of course, it's very easy  
when the topic is SEO and we are a willing, and 
are very knowable of the value of participating.  
But I do believe that there are many different 
ways nowadays like with Harrow or all the similar  
services out there to get input from experts too.
Kevin: 
Another question or dimension of thought that I 
want to add is that information gain looks very  
different based on the keyword or at least user 
intent. If one piece of information gain could  
just simply be looking for the results of a 
football game or a soccer game for the fellow  
Europeans. And the key piece of information is 
the score of course, but maybe some information  
gain is the different statistics that a team got 
and I don't know, in their steps or whatever. 
But it's very different. From an eCommerce 
perspective, there's certainly the price,  
but then there's also stuff how does it 
fit? How does it fit for a certain body  
type? There's all sorts of secondary, tertiary 
information that companies don't think about  
to quantify what information gain really means. 
And the most fuzzy aspect is when it comes to very  
complex topic that's covered mostly with text.
When you maybe write about  
why, I don't know, Napoleon failed in 
Russia or whatever, make something up.  
Something that needs a lot of explanation, 
that's where in my mind, information gain  
is the hardest and it's the easiest when it just 
comes to providing users data that's very useful. 
Bernard:
Question here from Amelia who asks, "Does Google  
take into account the expertise of the writer 
or just the originality of the content itself?"  
I'm going to add a follow up question to this. How 
does this all factor into expertise, authority,  
and trustworthiness and what you've seen a lot of 
websites do, where it's medically reviewed by X or  
trying to infuse the content to make it look 
more trustworthy? Are you all thoughts on this? 
Ethan:
Oh yeah, I've never actually seen an impact from  
having a specific expert listed as the source of 
the information. I've only seen writing content  
around where your topical authority is. You'll 
rank better at that. The MasterClass example,  
you’ll rank the Beef Wellington because you have 
to have topical authority for Gordon Ramsey,  
but I've seen no impact from listing Gordon Ramsey 
as author versus MasterClass editorial team versus  
no author. That's my data.
Cindy: 
I was just going to say that I think 
that that is what Google is trying to do,  
but it's hard because, like Aleyda was saying, 
the topical authorities are busy being topical  
authorities and aren't necessarily also being 
authors. There are going to be people who write  
that finding up whether they're the expert or 
not. It's a tough thing to do algorithmically. 
Aleyda:
I do believe that is very hard to isolate, because  
for example Lidy, she's very focused on EAT, she 
has shared quite a few examples in her experience  
where she mentions how doing a set of improve 
improvements on the articles among them  
listing a clear author and having... But these 
are usually also your money and your life  
type of topics where we know the sensitiveness 
is a little bit higher than other type of topics. 
And also, at the end of the day, 
it's also very hard to, let's say,  
at a granular level, isolate what is that the 
authority of the author, the authority of the  
publication itself in general. Things like the 
authority of the back links pointing to the piece,  
things like that. However, I have to say that the 
clear seniors you can provide being an authority  
in that field that you're writing, the better will 
be one of the things that we need to keep in mind. 
Also, I believe that Google has done a really good 
job in this case and the commanding update. One of  
the questions that they actually added their focus 
on, people first content in that section is like,  
are you keeping in mind our guidance for 
core updates on for products review? They  
all overlay and at the end of the day, the intent 
and the goal of Google is pretty much the same. 
They want high value content that is expert 
written, that is actually comprehensive,  
that actually adds value, et cetera. I actually 
aggregated all of the questions in Google sheet  
that I shared around to make it easier for us. 
Because the difficulty that I can see from this  
is many, many times explaining to copywriters 
in a way for them to double check and validate  
beyond the tools. Because indeed, I 
think it was Ethan who mentioned before,  
if we start adding the recommended number 
of keywords and the length in the piece,  
well we can always work around and just have a 
listicle of keywords and that's it. At the end  
of the day and it will pass the ratings or we'll 
have good ratings that will pass the validation. 
But we need to think about, is this really 
comprehensive? Will answer in a better way  
the need of the user searching for this 
versus all these other players that are  
already ranking for this query. At the end of the 
day, this is very context focus. What I actually  
will think about is, if there are many 
articles already ranking the top position, all  
clearly being written by doctors, but very visible 
credentials, I want to ensure that I have that  
too. I don't want to be missing that for sure.
Kevin: 
That's a good point and I really wonder 
how close Beef Wellington is to...  
What's his name? The chef. Help me out real quick.
Ethan: 
Gordon Ramsey.
Kevin: 
Thank you. Gordon Ramsey, on Google 
its entity graph, I'm sure they're  
not too far away. This is my take on authorship 
and how important it's to have authors. I think  
that Google can understand the connection between 
entities and if an author is an entity in Google's  
knowledge graph, then they can probably understand 
that. But I do think the bar is incredibly high  
to be recognized as an author or an important 
person in the eyes of Google. There's probably  
some credentials or some publications or some 
media attention that you have to have for that. 
Two examples I want to have really quick to 
make this practical is there are two sites  
that do this that highlight authors and 
they do really well. One is Healthline.  
Very, very successful side in the medical 
space and the other one is Trucks Advisor,  
which has gotten a lot of attention from SEO 
recently because they rank for best truck tires or  
whatever. They've been crushing in general lately.
And I don't think that they've been crushing it  
because they highlight the author that wrote 
the article, but because they, first of all,  
go to links to show how often the article was 
reviewed and by who it was reviewed. And those  
are typically subject matter experts. By the 
way, Chewy does it... Well, they have, I think  
it's a pet disease content hub or something 
that has content reviewed by veterinarians. 
And third, and this is I think the most important 
piece, is just that the content is better because  
you believe that it was reviewed by experts. 
Lets say that Google says, "Oh, it was reviewed  
three times and oh, these people have a doctorate 
title." But I think it's much more that the facts  
are correct and the information gain and depth 
of information is pretty high on these articles.  
That would be my take.
Bernard: 
Yeah, I agree with that. I think that obviously 
as SEOs, a lot of people are trying to  
understand the ways that the algorithm works and 
look to expedite gaming the potential systems  
that the algorithm is looking for. And I 
think a lot of that time, what SEOs might  
end up doing is chasing the wrong signal.
And I think in this particular case,  
this is one of those ideas where you see a 
lot of top websites, whether it be Chewy,  
Healthline, where they do these medically reviewed 
by and people see that and say, "Wow, that must be  
the rationale of why this page is 
doing so well," and they look to  
basically replicate that experience. But I think 
to build off of what you were saying, Kevin,  
it's really that because it's been reviewed 
by a lot of experts, there is a lot of good  
evidence backed suggestions and 
statements that are being made. 
And oftentimes people just want to eat 
the cake and not really do the work.  
And I think that's what you see a lot of people 
then chasing the wrong signal and saying, "Okay,  
well, I need that." But really a lot of the 
best articles, they don't necessarily need  
that reviewed by this expert. They just need 
to have that right structure and that right  
brand, and that right user experience where, 
when I land on an affiliate site, I want to know  
why I can trust you and what was your evaluation 
criteria that you took to make these decisions. 
I want to see photos of you actually using each 
one of the different products and really showing  
me that you did a good job in this evaluation. 
And a lot of people in affiliates just slap on a,  
"Well, Kevin Indig reviewed this," and they're 
like, "That should be good." And it's like, no,  
no, you got to do the work. And I think 
this update is Google's way of currently  
putting some PR behind what they want 
to influence us as content creators. 
And I think it's very similar to what 
Ethan has stated in his initial thoughts on  
helpful content. It's very likely that 
this is version 0.1 and we're going to see  
Google continue to build on top of this framework 
that they've had. And I think just lots of good  
thoughts going around here.
Aleyda: 
I think that it is really worthy here to be 
proactive. If we know that Google intent and  
goal is to try to replicate human assessment of 
value and satisfaction, let's try to identify  
as much as possible all those signals that we 
use and we certainly want to integrate within  
our work and effort in order to be best in class.
I don't want to wait until Google confirms that  
they use X or Y as a signal just for me 
to start doing it. I know that I want to  
give the best experience to my clients, to my 
users in the website. This actually goes most  
of times well aligned whit UX, and with a lot 
of other, let's say, good practices in general  
to provide the best expectations or 
to fulfill the expectations of users. 
I will try, as much as possible, to align my work 
with the product team, with UX team in order to  
whatever we can highlight and show the users that 
we know that will improve the conversions anyway  
and help to achieve results, I'm all for it.
Cindy: 
There's also this concept that's going around with 
blaming the internet and social media and Google  
and all the big players for dumbing down 
content and rewarding the lowest common  
denominator or just rewarding engagement that 
is not necessarily with high quality content. 
And you see that even with guidelines that come 
out about people who write complex sentences,  
"Oh, Google doesn't like complex 
sentences." And yeah, Google's algorithm  
has a hard time parsing a complex sentence, 
so that makes sense. But at the same time,  
if I'm Google, I don't want to just reward 
sites that write "Jane likes Beef Wellington,  
Jane wants to cook Beef Wellington, 
Jane needs 10 ingredients." 
I think that it may be a backing off of that 
kind of simplicity or a more rewarding content  
that is a bit more nuanced. And if I were Google, 
I would want that because I would separate myself  
from maybe Facebook or things like that. Because 
you do see, like in Google Discover, some really  
lowest common denominator content coming in and 
it's because of just engagement. And if you want  
to separate yourself from just rewarding that 
kind of thing, you would do what they're doing  
now or the way they're communicating 
it. That's what I would be going for. 
Bernard:
I want to circle this back around to  
a lot of Q&A that's that's been popping up. I know 
we're dancing around this whole information gain  
topic, but Justin asks, "Okay, but how is Google 
going to determine original thought?" Back to this  
information gain thing, really to say, "Okay, 
if we're going to put on our SEO like crystal  
ball hats here, how are you all thinking about 
practically speaking, demonstrating to Google that  
you have content that has information gain, since 
a lot of it could be very subjective and measuring  
originality is something very difficult, at 
least potentially difficult for AI to accomplish. 
Ethan:
I have thoughts on this. I think  
the answer that sounds good is good engagement. 
You found your answer, you did go back to Google,  
but those have already been signals. I 
don't think that's the full solution.  
I think the solution is around uniqueness and 
useful uniqueness. The way that the algorithm  
currently works is there's labels that 
the machine learning algorithm trains for,  
so these three results are great, so anything that 
is similar to these three results is also great.  
Which means everyone's rewriting each other's 
articles and therefore the system incentivizes  
everyone to rewrite each other's articles.
Then you want uniqueness, but you want useful  
uniqueness. If you think about a camera, if you 
have on a camera and you have the word tangerine  
and nobody else has the word tangerine, that's 
unique, but it's not useful uniqueness. But if for  
that camera, you're the only one that talked about 
lowlight photography, that's useful uniqueness. 
The way that I think that they would do that 
is they would know that lowlight photography  
and camera are close to each other in their 
knowledge graph and tangerine's way over here.  
My guess is that they're going to be looking 
for, "Did you mention subtopics and themes  
that others didn't but it is closely 
associated within a knowledge graph?"  
Is my guess.
Kevin: 
Yeah, I agree on the knowledge graph. I don't 
think this is so difficult for Google to be  
very honest and blunt. I think that one of the 
big questions in this whole conversation is also  
what's the stack rank of the signals or how do 
they relate to each other? And I think in the  
past, even though it was often denied it was a 
big impact from back links. I'm not saying that's  
necessarily going away, but for originality, to 
make it bigger impact, you can also just turn  
other signals slightly down or that originality 
slightly up. But Google should already be able  
to understand what information a piece of content 
has, especially after transformers and MoM. This  
is text mining on steroids if you will. That 
should be very obvious to Google. And then another  
signal to pair this with, because not every signal 
lives in isolation, is the behavior of users. 
If you go back, if you start with a very 
high level topic or a very short query,  
you read something and you go back and you 
enter a longer query that is more targeted,  
Google can understand that perfectly fine. This 
is how a lot of personalization works. And they  
can measure very well what that looks like after 
people have visited a certain piece of content.  
I think there's several signals that balance 
each other that help Google to make a right call.  
And from a purely technical perspective, 
I don't think that this is something  
groundbreaking the new, I think the signal that 
Google has decided to end up, because the content  
quality is often so bad.
Cindy: 
I'll just throw one more thing in and that 
is the content frequency. Even though this  
is another thing that Google denies, having 
an aggressive publishing schedule where you're  
publishing every day, Google says that doesn't 
help you. But I think that in some cases it does  
create some benefits or has created some 
benefits. But if you're the original thinker,  
the original creator, the original author, you 
might not be publishing every day and that's okay. 
I tend to see this, and perhaps differently than 
the other panelists. I see it a little bit as an  
easing off of some things that have been maybe not 
direct signals, but secondary signals and rewards  
in lieu of things that are harder to create with 
AI or create with a team of regurgitating writers. 
Bernard:
Speaking of AI, that's been a topic that's  
been highly speculative, highly sought after. 
Let's talk about AI. What are your thoughts about  
AI content as it relates to SEO, this concept that 
we're talking about information gain? And I'll  
start with Kevin. You had a really great blog post 
recently that talks about basically the pros and  
cons. It's not a do it or don't do, it's a it 
depends on the situation. AI is really good for  
certain classes of content, more specifically 
definitional things, things where I would say...  
And this is back to that content uniqueness 
idea, AI's really good when us as human beings  
have all decided that X is X. The first president 
of the United States was George Washington  
and AI's really good at that. Anyways, people's 
thoughts about how AI, specifically content  
created by, stuff like GPT-3 is going to 
influence SEO content moving forward? We'll  
start with you Kevin.
Kevin: 
Yeah, thanks for setting the stage, Bernard. As 
you already mentioned, I think we really have to  
talk about the types of content and what the role 
of content is. It is not always the product or the  
thing itself. It can sometimes just be adjacent 
or supporting the main role of the show or the  
main piece of content, which in the eCommerce for 
example, is the product. And then you have a lot  
of content around that describes the product 
or gives you helpful secondary information  
that helps with information gain.
And for things that are not already  
complex, the AI already does a good job. And 
this is something that I changed my mind on  
a lot before I saw more practical examples. I 
actually thought that when companies have an AI,  
they all create the same content and then 
Google just devalues it like they devalue links. 
And I don't think that's true. I think what's 
actually happening is that some companies are  
figuring out how to do this and do this well 
for certain types of purposes and certain  
types of content, and it ranks pretty well. In the 
light of the helpful content update and previous  
statements by Google's spokespeople, there 
was this notion that Google hates AI content. 
I paid a lot of attention on sites that lean 
heavily on AI content to drive organic traffic.  
And that traffic has only increased during 
the helpful content update. That definitely  
hasn't tanked. To me that goes to show that 
if you do it well and if you do it right,  
then there's no problem with AI content. Why 
should it matter who creates the content? It  
doesn't matter if it's a machine or a human. All 
that matters is information gain and is it useful. 
Aleyda:
Well, I was going to say, is  
how you use it. Actually, I want to add here an 
scenario that I see a lot where clients that tend  
to go through the internationalization process, 
most of translations tools at this point leverage  
automatic translators like DeepL, amazing 
quality already, or Weglot, for example.  
They integrate into the human translator 
process or workflow to facilitate their task. 
And they can have that as an 
input. That doesn't mean that  
the content will be completely translated by AI 
completely, by the tool, by the translator, but  
that it will be much easier for the translator 
to go ahead and do potentially, I don't know,  
10 pieces per day rather than five or four. 
I believe that there's this good sweet spot,  
as Kevin mentioned, it makes me remember a 
lot with templated content back in the day. 
Like, "Oh, is templated content good or bad?" Oh, 
it depends on how you actually leverage it, and  
how smart you are, how creative you are, what are 
the criteria that you take into consideration to  
generate it. And do you use stats? Do you use your 
unique insights? Et cetera, et cetera. Exactly the  
same is how you use it, how you include it, also 
what type of content it is in what type of pages.  
Is this content actually valuable to answer 
the doubts at that stage of the journey  
independently if it is 100% original or not?
There's a lot to be save there. I will highly,  
highly recommend people to be creative about 
it, to think of how you can leverage it,  
rather than live it on out pilot, 
which is definitely not great,  
how you can use it to accelerate the process 
of content optimization, content translation,  
et cetera.
Ethan: 
Yeah, just building on that, the way that I think 
about it is that there needs to be underlying  
wisdom. Especially if you have structured 
data, and an example would be a sporting event.  
You talk about the score and somebody made 
a basket at this particular point in time,  
that's all structured data and that can be 
generated. You can generate sentences based on  
underlying wisdom, which is that structured data.
We invested in this one company called  
withpower.com in their extract structure 
from clinical trial information and  
generate sentences based on that and that has 
underlying wisdom. We then also tested generating  
product descriptions for products. And I remember 
GPT-3 said that a particular soap was oxide free,  
but it wasn't oxide free. And if you need it 
to be oxide free, that would be a big problem. 
And the more nuance it is, and the more it's based 
on a personal experience that Google mentions "Did  
you use the product?" If you need to use the 
product to see if it's usable, you don't want  
GPT-3 telling you whether or not the product is 
usable. You want a human talking about that. I  
think it needs to have underlying wisdom and some 
things have structured data that you can automate.  
Having underlying wisdom and a lot of stuff  
does not.
Bernard: 
All right, we have quite a few open questions. 
I'm going to make this more of a rapid fire type  
thing, throwing this to who I think might be the 
best fit in answering. But if you have additional  
thoughts, chime in and let's make this happen. 
Anonymous asks, "On the topic of expertise,  
what's stopping organizations from 
hiring journalists to do journalism?  
i. e. doing deep research, chasing experts 
or quotes and context or publishing long  
explainer features like Vogue's and other 
journalistic publications." I'm going to  
kick this over to you Ethan, since you're 
really deep into the content space right now. 
Ethan:
I think it's the business model. That costs  
money. And again, if you have a hundred articles 
and five work and you don't know the five,  
then you cannot afford to pay that writer. If 
you do know the five, then you can afford to pay  
the writer. The business model and selecting the 
topics that are likely to perform is number one. 
And then number two is that a lot of times 
journalists don't want to write content  
that is search friendly. Suggesting to the 
journalists, "These are the general subtopics  
that users are interested in" versus "Hey, please 
stick these keywords in," guiding that journalist  
to answer questions that users have but still 
have journalistic integrity, so the process of  
working with that journalist, those are the two 
main things. But I think that both of those can  
be done if you have a better process.
Bernard: 
Awesome. All right. Another anonymous asks. 
"Think Google should bring back authorship tags  
to determine the value of writers for determining 
expertise. If someone who is an expert at the CDC  
is writing on a new site about virology, should 
it be promoted more than an intern writing in the  
editorial column on that site? Should the power 
be in the author's topical authority expertise  
or the power to be in the domain for what it's 
labeled as?" I'm going to kick this over to you,  
Cindy. What are your thoughts?
Cindy: 
Yeah. Number one, I think that the author tag 
was educating Google about where to look for  
author information. And now that it's changed 
and not as necessary, that doesn't mean it goes  
away. I think Google used the information and now 
they're just better at finding who is the author  
and ascertaining information about that 
author and connecting it to the topic. 
I think that every time Google does something 
like that, it's just asking us to code stuff  
so that it can train their algorithms to 
know where on the page and the site to find  
that information. Authorship still matters. The 
one thing I'll caution is that I think that we  
on the internet throw around authorship quite 
loosely, that anyone can be an author and publish  
things on the internet. But if we think about 
separate being an author online and writing  
stuff that anyone could publish online, versus 
writing a book or writing something that has to  
be published by a publishing company, that kind of 
authorship may carry more cache in Google's mind. 
Not just lumping all the 
different authors together.  
And yes, I do think that Google has the goal 
of connecting author's credentials with what  
ranks where. The example earlier 
that Aleyda gave from all the PhDs  
writing about medical stuff, yes you want 
to have the right credentials and you don't  
just want staff writer transcribing 
what the actual expert basically said. 
Hiring the experts when you can is always 
ideal. It's just like what Ethan said,  
the model doesn't allow just... There are only 
so many experts and they only have so much time  
and they're expensive and hard to get. Yeah.
Bernard: 
Can you speak to the relationship between 
creating original content and using keyword  
or other SEO best practices? Are both still 
important? I'll tack on like a follow up thing.  
This idea of subtopic search intent, zero 
keyword search volume, there's a lot of  
confusion now around, "Are you targeting 
keywords, are you going after the long tail?"  
What are we doing? I'm going to kick this 
over to you, Aleyda. What are your thoughts  
on this?
Aleyda: 
It depends on the goals of the business at the 
end of the day and what's their business model.  
For some type of businesses, it does make sense to 
develop topical authorities, and at the same time  
that they are targeting more commercial queries to 
also develop the content hub for their top topics  
for example. And indeed, the challenge here many, 
many times is to, on one hand, show the value of  
this type of content that will play a role through 
the customer journey indeed, but won't necessarily  
generate conversions right away. It won't 
be at the end of the journey, necessarily. 
It's important to a little bit educate and 
evangelize of the need of, "Okay, if you  
want to establish yourself in your sector and you 
want to be thought as a leading brand etcetera,  
you need to develop this content." And 
then on the other hand how you talk with  
writers in a way that you don't alienate them.
I think that we have had a lot of that for a  
while. And SEOs in general, I'm afraid that in 
certain sectors with copywriters, developed this  
reputation. I remember quite a few years ago when 
I was at this content conference in Minneapolis  
and I was literally the only SEO in the whole 
conference that was pretty much focused on content  
people, they did made a joke at the expense of 
SEO. "Ah, yes. The SEO comes and tells you 'Add  
keywords,' hahaha." Oh my god, that was terrible.
Anyway, I think that we are long past that  
with tools, with content tools. Of course, 
they provide us which are those terms that  
are identified to be semantically connected, 
relevant related. But whenever I start with a  
new process, I do this, let's say, a little bit 
of trading and worship with the writers and we  
go through practical sessions showing "Does this 
make sense?" Not because all the articles that are  
ranking the top 10 already are mentioning this.
And there are quite a few times that they mention  
it. It actually makes sense for you because maybe 
there's diversity on the nature of the articles  
are ranked and you are not like these articles 
necessarily, but these other ones. It's important  
that there's a good communication, best practices, 
yes, but always with the final goal. And this  
is something that I have found that writers 
appreciate a lot, that at the end of the day  
they are the ones who are writing, they know 
about the topic, they are going to research  
that you can recommend and it's highly 
advisable whenever it makes sense for the  
goal of the articles to include certain terms.
But it's not like a red flag to, "Oh you need to  
add 50 keywords. If you don't add them, it's 
bad." No, sometimes it doesn't make sense.  
Sometimes it's not doable because of the role of 
that particular content or that particular piece.  
And it's okay. Is important to have this 
conversation and I do believe that copywriters  
will highly appreciate you clarifying this 
very common doubt, that is not back in the  
days like "Keyword here, yes or yes." And we 
need to move away from this reputation, indeed. 
Bernard:
Couldn't agree more. A couple  
more. The highly voted ones that Rico asks, "How 
much of a reaction to TikTok being used more and  
more to solve queries do you think this update 
is?" I could not think of a better person than  
Kevin to answer this because your recent blog 
post is more or less talking about this. Kevin,  
your thoughts?
Kevin: 
My thoughts. Quick answer. I don't think they're 
too related to be very straightforward. A signal  
that would've convinced me otherwise would 
be to see a lot more short video carousels  
in the search results or see just a lot more 
TikTok content in general. But I think it's  
more like the anti TikTok update, if 
I really think about it. Because if  
we would transcribe the majority of content 
on TikTok and rank that high search results,  
there would be a lot more conspiracy theory 
believers and a lot more fake news. I think  
actually TikTok really needs the helpful content 
update right now, we're fact checking content.  
I don't want to hog the mic too much, but short 
answer is, I don't think they're related and  
content on TikTok is disastrous.
Bernard: 
... mentioned that you write a hundred pieces 
and five will work. How do you pick the five?  
Is it based on volume, intent, difficulty to 
rank? Garrett then has a follow up question.  
"When you get to a more focused approach, through 
10, maybe 20 out of the hundred begin to work." 
Ethan:
Two things. It's search volume  
at the topic level and it's topical authority, 
versus difficulty. When I say topics, I mean  
for something like butter lettuce. The MasterClass 
article ranks for 500 different keywords, and the  
sum of the volume of those 500 is the volume of 
that topic. That's the topic volume number one. 
And then it's topical authority versus general 
keyword difficulty, versus domain authority.  
To the Gordon Ramsey example. If you're known 
for Gordon Ramsey, then you're going to be very  
topically authoritative and competitive for 
Beef Wellington. It's a combination of total  
volume times probability to rank equals expected 
visits. And then also ideally, if you have some  
conversion intent and you can factor that back 
in and then you can have expected traffic times  
conversion equals expected conversions.
Bernard: 
Okay. To add on that, because topical authority 
has been thrown around quite a bit in this  
discussion, how do you know you have topical 
authority? And where would you go to figure out  
what those very related subtopics that you have a 
very high chance of placing for quickly look like? 
Ethan:
For the first one, all you need to do  
is go to Google search console, download all your 
keywords and then do end grams on them. By that I  
mean chop them up into one, two word phrases, and 
that's your topical authority. The inputs to that  
are branded search, the MasterClass plus Gordon 
Ramsey. That's like a back link with rich anchor  
text Gordon Ramsey, back links with rich anchor 
text. Those are the inputs, shares of popular  
posts and what the post is about. Those are the 
inputs. But the short answer to how do you know,  
literally just download all your keywords 
and that's the answer to topical authority. 
How do you find adjacent topics? That's a little 
bit harder. That, you need to use keyword tools  
and use some intuition and stuff like that. 
There's not really an automated process. It's  
mostly art and some science. I think Google has 
their own knowledge graph. Ideally you would  
just be able to download their knowledge 
graph, but in lieu of that, you need to  
make some guesses and use the tuition. 
Somebody should build that tool though. 
Bernard:
Somebody should. All right. I'm going to then  
conclude with the final question from anonymous. 
"I'd love to hear what new directives or  
expectations you've given to content writers on 
your team, to your clients, to the people that  
you're working with, other SEOs, everybody." Let's 
close it out with this. Maybe starting with Cindy,  
what are some new directives or expectations?
Cindy: 
Well. With the helpful content and then September 
update, we've always assumed that helpful content  
is something that is going to be impacted by 
September update and I think it will. But also  
looking backwards in the launch of pros and cons, 
I wonder if having nuanced perspectives is also  
considered helpful. Marking up your pros and cons, 
that's where I'm going right now, and making sure  
that you're giving balanced information with pros 
and cons, that usually seems helpful to me. That's  
where I'm going.
Aleyda: 
Yeah, the main goal that I have already for a 
while, and I re-state every single time is like,  
is this the most comprehensive and best in class 
piece of information that deserve to rank all of  
the other players that are ranking at the top 
at the moment? That should be the north start.  
And whatever it is required, depending 
on the intent, on the type of the format,  
of the query and the servs. Let's try to 
leverage that and make the most out of that. 
Many times it will be to ask for testimonial 
to power users, ask for reviews or integrate  
reviews even to act. All the times it 
will be to ask for input from experts,  
for example. It might different depending 
on the nature of the content, of the type  
of content. But I think that as a good approach, 
it will be, have data is an north star to be the  
best up of those that are already ranking. Add 
something extra, add something more on one hand. 
And then on other hand, understanding what 
are the opportunities within the servs,  
which are your competitors that already ranking 
the top positions, not only in the organic ones,  
but also in the video carousel, if there is any. 
People also ask, pay attention of what is in the  
servs to leverage and learn and integrate as much 
as possible in order to perform and to be the best  
answer out there.
Bernard: 
Yeah. No. I guess I'll go next. I think that 
to keep it short and simple, really think about  
you're above the fold experience. Tons of people 
get this wrong. You see it in "Oh, how do I do  
this?" And then you have an H one that's "What is 
this?" And I'm like, "Ah, come on. That's not why  
the users here." Or the concept of hero images. 
Lots of people just put random hero images in the  
top spots and it's like, "Well, the user doesn't 
really care about that." Really just hone in on,  
"Okay, when a user clicks onto your site, 
can you give them the most useful relevant  
information as quickly as possible?" 
Pass over the mic to Ethan. Thoughts  
on? Directives?
Ethan: 
The main directive is to cover all the subtopics 
and to be comprehensive. For the butter lettuce  
example, try to understand what 500 keywords 
you're actually targeting and what the themes  
are. Like health benefits, comparing with other 
kinds of lettuce recipes, and make sure that  
you cover all of those subtopic themes. Subtopics 
versus keywords. Don't over optimize for an exact  
word counter adding these specific keywords. 
Understand the general themes and subtopics  
and talk about all of them and fulfill the 
intent of the whole keyword cluster of the topic.  
But in general, we don't suggest to writers 
anything at all about SEO. It's more about this  
is the outline than these are the subtopics 
and themes and questions that users have,  
write a really good article.
Kevin: 
That's a good question. I haven't changed 
any guidance so far at all, because the data  
is still not out there. The September update 
is still running. We still don't know what's  
punished and what's changed. Imagine just 
on Google's announcement that would've  
given guidance to companies to go to extra 
lengths, invest more budget, do all the stuff,  
and then we see just some, like lyrics side being 
penalized. It already suck. I'm really cautious.  
But the one thing that weighs on my mind a little 
bit is, if it comes to stuff like content briefs,  
to add a question along the lines of how is 
different than everything else? What's the  
unique thing about this piece of content or what's 
the unique insight that people take away that they  
cannot get anywhere else?
Bernard: 
Kevin, thank you so, so much for joining us. I 
got a kick out of just hearing all of you all's  
opinions, thoughts, perspectives, and 
I'm sure that our audience did too.  
There were so many good questions that 
were asked. So much good discussion.  
We definitely need to do this again, make this 
happen again. We'd love to have you all on  
for an encore, whether that's when 
Google announces random stuff or just  
regular programming. We would love to have 
you here. Thanks so much for joining us.  
And any concluding thoughts, opinions, 
questions from any of you all panelists? 
Aleyda:
Thank for- 
Ethan:
Thanks for getting us all together. 
Aleyda:
Yeah, it was great to speak. 
Bernard:
Yes. We'll do it again. Take care everybody. 
Aleyda:
Thank you. Bye, bye. 
Kevin:
Thanks. Bye, bye.